Control catalog Concepts page updates (#1295)
usnistgov/OSCAL: docs/content/concepts/layer/control/catalog/sp800-53rev5-example.md

heading: "NIST SP 800-53 rev 5 Annotated Example"
weight: 30
sidenav:
  title: SP800-53 Control Example
toc:
  enabled: true
---

{{<callout>}}**Please note:**

- The following commentary uses and shows XML syntax. A later revision will offer JSON and YAML translations.
- Full versions of the NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 5 catalog are available in OSCAL [XML]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/xml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.xml), [JSON]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/json/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.json), and [YAML]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/yaml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.yaml) formats in the OSCAL content GitHub repository. These examples also include assessment and objective content from NIST SP 800-53A Rev. 5, *not shown here*.
{{</callout>}}

The following is a non-normative, partial illustration showing how control **AC-1** from NIST SP [800-53 Rev. 5](https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5) can be rendered in OSCAL Catalog XML format with a `<control>` element.

First we start with the following control text from SP 800-53. (Formatting adjusted for conciseness and legibility.)

> > **AC-1 POLICY AND PROCEDURES**

Reviewer: AC-1 title is not all caps in oscal-content 800-53rev5 catalog.
```
<control class="SP800-53" id="ac-1">
         <title>Policy and Procedures</title>
```

Author: Indeed, very acutely observed. The PDF of the control catalog as published (the text we are transcribing) has this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1588228/174178451-23c1c142-22ad-4f4c-a834-1ed0ece995fc.png)

while in the OSCAL, the values are normalized to English sentence case (which has a couple of important advantages).

Is this worth calling out in the commentary?

Reviewer: > Is this worth calling out in the commentary?

Probably not. Anyone who thinks that the PDF _rendition_ is authoritative (as opposed to its lamentably unstructured content) will insist that all caps, small caps, underlines, italics, indentation, color, and other such typographical aspects convey deep meaning which cannot be ignored: Section 508 is for other folks.

Author: Indeed, the ornamental capitals are only one example of a rather large class of signifiers.

---
title: SP800-53 Control Example
heading: "NIST SP 800-53 rev 5 Annotated Example"
weight: 30
sidenav:
  title: SP800-53 Control Example
toc:
  enabled: true
---

{{<callout>}}**Please note:**

- The following commentary uses and shows XML syntax. A later revision will offer JSON and YAML translations.

> - Full versions of the NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 5 catalog are available in OSCAL [XML]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/xml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.xml), [JSON]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/json/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.json), and [YAML]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/yaml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.yaml) formats in the OSCAL content GitHub repository. These examples also include assessment and objective content from NIST SP 800-53A Rev. 5, *not shown here*.

Reviewer 2: Please spell out "revision".
```suggestion
- Full versions of the NIST SP 800-53 Revision 5 catalog are available in OSCAL [XML]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/xml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.xml), [JSON]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/json/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.json), and [YAML]({{< param "contentRepoPath" >}}/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/yaml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.yaml) formats in the OSCAL content GitHub repository. These examples also include assessment and objective content from NIST SP 800-53A Revision 5, *not shown here*.
```

Reviewer 2: @wendellpiez Can you make this adjustment in the other places where this appears?

Author: Will have to do that in post.

>
> __Related Controls__: IA-1, PM-9, PM-24, PS-8, SI-12.
>
> __Control Enhancements__: None.
>
> __References__: [OMB A-130], [SP 800-12], [SP 800-30], [SP 800-39], [SP 800-100], [IR 7874].

> Encoding this text in OSCAL entails an analysis that turns it "inside out" and exposes the implicit structures (the "bones") as a kind of exoskeleton around the text, using a common and non-proprietary data encoding standard such as XML or JSON to provide the "form" of the cast. Within this organization, all these data points become distinguishable and recognizable to any downstream processor (consumer or partner) who expects OSCAL, or who can interpret it, defining OSCAL both narrowly, in its technical senses, and broadly: as a standard, a set of norms and conventions, a collection of tools, applications and resources, and a community of practice. From the encoded data, the text's "original format" (or something like it) can be restored, but much else can be done as well: the semantics of the information (the set of meaningful discriminations) can be mined, sifted, collated, ranked, annotated, and related to other data points internal or external.

Reviewer 2: We should be more direct and use less exposition in this paragraph. Something like:
```suggestion
Representing this text in a machine readable form involves providing more structure around the text, allowing each data point to be easily identified by a machine. OSCAL defines the syntax for XML, JSON, and YAML structures to represent this information, allowing any downstream consumer, who expects OSCAL, to parse this data. This allows a processor to produce the text's "original" or any other format from the structured OSCAL representation. The processor can also sort, analyze, filter, enrich or transform this data for any purpose.
```

- The control ID is "ac-1". All `id` values are unique within the document and serve for addressing and linking. The lexical form of the `id` is designed to be consistent with its formal (conventional) code or label, which is *also* encoded within the control (in this case, "AC-1"). While such regularities are normal and to be expected, this one is a feature of this data set, not a requirement of OSCAL generally.
- The `<title>` of the control captures the text of the control's title as given in display and navigation. Unlike `id` values, titles are not required to be unique, and indeed in this catalog, each family of controls is headed by a control entitled "Policy and Procedures". In an application, the control title can be adjusted for display in any way needed - for example, prepended with the name of the family as **Access Control - Policy and Procedures", or converted into all upper case.

## Parameters

> The control continues with `<param>` elements. This is the first place where the electronic file definitively and explicitly captures information about the source data that is left implicit in in its published form (that is, as a document). In this case, the information captured regards options for control configuration (by users of the catalog) in detail, which will subsequently be reflected in the control text as rendered, but which are called out here as first-class objects so that OSCAL consumers can handle them in appropriate ways.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The control continues with `<param>` elements. This is the first place where the structured form captures information about the source data that is left implicit in in its published form (that is, as a document). In this case, the information captured regards options for control configuration (by users of the catalog) in detail, which will subsequently be reflected in the control text as rendered, but which are called out here as first-class objects so that OSCAL consumers can handle them in appropriate ways.
```

On links, `href` follows the semantics of `href` as defined for HTML/HTTP by W3C. `rel` is constrained as an enumerated value by OSCAL.

{{<highlight xml "nowrap=false" >}}
<link rel="reference" href="#27847491-5ce1-4f6a-a1e4-9e483782f0ef"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#c7ac44e8-10db-4b64-b2b9-9e32ec1efed0"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#08b07465-dbdc-48d6-8a0b-37279602ac16"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#cec037f3-8aba-4c97-84b4-4082f9e515d2"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#4c0ec2ee-a0d6-428a-9043-4504bc3ade6f"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#7f473f21-fdbf-4a6c-81a1-0ab95919609d"/>
<link rel="related" href="#ia-1"/>
<link rel="related" href="#pm-9"/>
<link rel="related" href="#pm-24"/>
<link rel="related" href="#ps-8"/>
<link rel="related" href="#si-12"/>
{{< / highlight >}}

> No rule in OSCAL prevents a link from targeting any resource or target whatsoever; but catalog authors can be expected to manage their links according to regimes appropriate to their catalogs. In the case of SP 800-53, internal links (from one control to another) are represented as __Related Controls__ in the formatted source. These are easily indicated via `href` fragment identifiers - `#ia-1` referencing the entity with `id` value `ia-1`, which of course happens to be control IA-1.

Author: It is both a constraint, and a rule. Indeed, not only does no constraint in OSCAL prevent users from making links freely, but also, no rule does either -- not even a rule that is not being enforced. (Ponder that!)

> No rule in OSCAL prevents a link from targeting any resource or target whatsoever; but catalog authors can be expected to manage their links according to regimes appropriate to their catalogs. In the case of SP 800-53, internal links (from one control to another) are represented as __Related Controls__ in the formatted source. These are easily indicated via `href` fragment identifiers - `#ia-1` referencing the entity with `id` value `ia-1`, which of course happens to be control IA-1.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I should be more clear: when we implement rules sooner rather than later, this blurs the lines what thing we describe in prose is actually `rule` or `constraint` if you look at OSCAL and/or its Metaschema? This seems specifically a description of "this won't be a constraint."

That being said, this is a minor piece of editorial feedback. I will silence this PR feedback and suggestion.

> No rule in OSCAL prevents a link from targeting any resource or target whatsoever; but catalog authors can be expected to manage their links according to regimes appropriate to their catalogs. In the case of SP 800-53, internal links (from one control to another) are represented as __Related Controls__ in the formatted source. These are easily indicated via `href` fragment identifiers - `#ia-1` referencing the entity with `id` value `ia-1`, which of course happens to be control IA-1.

Author: This page is for beginners, pretty much. For anyone deep enough to be confused, we can suggest the term "rule" here is used here in a non-technical sense. Kind of like the term "link", which arguably encompasses both `link` and `a` objects in the model, without explanation. Because there are "rules" in one part of a system does not mean there are not also "rules" in some other part of the system or applicable in some other layer.

OSCAL rules do not forbid you from using links as you wish; this includes permitting you to make rules for them. Interestingly, what you are (implicitly) pointing out is that in fact there is indeed some regularity here in SP800-53 *alone*, perhaps not appropriate to other catalogs, around usage of `link[@rel='related']` and `link[@rel='reference']`. However, those rules for SP800-53 are made within the context of OSCAL rules that (by saying nothing) permit you to assert your own rules.

> No rule in OSCAL prevents a link from targeting any resource or target whatsoever; but catalog authors can be expected to manage their links according to regimes appropriate to their catalogs. In the case of SP 800-53, internal links (from one control to another) are represented as __Related Controls__ in the formatted source. These are easily indicated via `href` fragment identifiers - `#ia-1` referencing the entity with `id` value `ia-1`, which of course happens to be control IA-1.

Reviewer 2: I think we should avoid using "rule", since this will have a different meaning when we support rules and tests in OSCAL. I like "constraints" better.

*References*, however (in contrast to related controls),  function as bibliographic citations, using a code for each reference given in the PDF source. In the OSCAL, the bibliographic items are collected and encoded in the catalog back matter (`<back-matter>`) as `<resource>` elements.

So for example, in its back matter the catalog XML for SP 800-53 may have something like:

{{<highlight xml "nowrap=false" >}}
<resource uuid="27847491-5ce1-4f6a-a1e4-9e483782f0ef">
  <title>OMB A-130</title>
  <citation>
    <text>Office of Management and Budget Memorandum Circular A-130,
    <em>Managing Information as a Strategic Resource</em> , July 2016.</text>
  </citation>
</resource>
{{< / highlight >}}

(*Note*: in the actual data, this resource is also provided with a link, not shown here.)

The `uuid` value on this `<resource>` serves as its ID for internal links targeting this element. Incidentally, a survey of the catalog source data in this case also shows this particular reference is made from 96 different controls.

> Note that here, the code phrase used in the source to identify the bibliographic item (such as "OMB A-130") is regarded as a presentational artifact, not as a control point or formal identifier. This allows both freedom and fidelity to anomalous (and potentially conflicting) data sources, while providing for the linkage itself to be robust, expressed by means of a UUID. In rendition or display, any link to this resource can retrieve and show a title, citation text or outbound link as needed, where they are available.

Author: In the full text of SP800-53, little string identifiers are used to label bibliographic items that are being cited. "OMB A-130", that is, is a code, representing that document or more properly, the citation of (some particular) document in the back matter. Open to suggestions for a better way to call this thing.

> Note that here, the code phrase used in the source to identify the bibliographic item (such as "OMB A-130") is regarded as a presentational artifact, not as a control point or formal identifier. This allows both freedom and fidelity to anomalous (and potentially conflicting) data sources, while providing for the linkage itself to be robust, expressed by means of a UUID. In rendition or display, any link to this resource can retrieve and show a title, citation text or outbound link as needed, where they are available.

Author: Going to repair this in a commit. On reflection, "string" might be better.

OSCAL is neutral and agnostic as to whether and what kind of dependency is to be taken as expressed or warranted between controls and their subcontrols, as modeled: it is merely a feature available for use (and an alternative to linking and labeling) by catalog authors, which also reflects the SP 800-53 "two-layered" architecture (while also being extensible to three or more layers). With respect to this aspect of the information modeling, OSCAL tries to stay out of the way, letting the data speak for itself.

As encoded using nested control structures, this organization has the virtue of providing a straightforward "literal" presentation of a control with its enhancements -- both when (re)formatted for reading or reference, and for tools consuming encoded data -- while permitting catalog authors a combination of flexibility and transparency. Another good example of a control with enhancements in SP 800-53 is **AC-2 Account Management**, with enhancements such as **AC-2(1) Automated System Account Management** and **AC 2(5) Inactivity Logout**. Enhancements will ordinarily have their own titles, statements, properties, parameters and links.

> {{<todo>}}

Reviewer 2: This todo prevents content that is not ready to posted from appearing on the site. I don't think we can remove it.

            <li>rules which require specific approval before enactment and those which do not.</li>
        </ol>
    </p>
    <p>Access control rules should be supported by formal procedures and defined responsibilities.</p>
    <p>Role based access control is an approach used successfully by many organizations to link access rights with business roles.</p>
    <p>Two of the frequent principles directing the access control policy are:
        <ol type="a">
            <li>Need-to-know: you are only granted access to the information you need to perform your tasks (different tasks/roles mean different need-to-know and hence different access profile);</li>
            <li>Need-to-use: you are only granted access to the information processing facilities (IT equipment, applications, procedures, rooms) you need to perform your task/job/role.</li>
        </ol>
    </p>
</blockquote>

**NOTE:** Some of the reference links have been removed in the above examples as compared to the original source. This was done to simplify the text for illustration.

## Comparing the ISO 27002 and NIST SP 800-53 Examples

> Comparing the ISO 27002 and NIST SP 800-53 examples illustrates obvious differences. NIST SP 800-53 includes several components, such as references and control enhancements that ISO 27002 does not. NIST SP 800-53's statement of the control itself is also much more detailed and specific than ISO 27002 because it provides those details in its implementation guidance instead of the control text. There are other differences in terminology as well, such as NIST SP 800-53 using the term "supplemental guidance" for roughly what ISO 27002 calls "other information".

Reviewer 3: This is minor, and feel free to disregard, but using the word "components" here given `component`s in OSCAL document instances? "Syntax features" is a rough attempt but I am sure others can recommend a better alternative.

```suggestion
Comparing the ISO 27002 and NIST SP 800-53 examples illustrates obvious differences. NIST SP 800-53 includes several syntax features, such as references and control enhancements that ISO 27002 does not. NIST SP 800-53's statement of the control itself is also much more detailed and specific than ISO 27002 because it provides those details in its implementation guidance instead of the control text. There are other differences in terminology as well, such as NIST SP 800-53 using the term "supplemental guidance" for roughly what ISO 27002 calls "other information".
```

Author: I would go for "structures" but they aren't actually syntax features, they are entities within the OSCAL model, any of which might be expressible using different syntax.

Author: Changed the language in a subsequent commit: https://github.com/wendellpiez/OSCAL/commit/5658aee5cad89ae6e38331e77b24323254684549

To address these differences, OSCAL is designed to take disparate control definitions from different sources and express them in a standardized way using the catalog model. The OSCAL catalog model defines structured, machine-readable XML, JSON, and YAML representations of the information contained within a control. A control defined using the OSCAL catalog model supports including control statements, guidance, assessment objectives, and many other features. By combining all of this information in a single model, the OSCAL catalog model simplifies the entire control-based operational model.

> {{</todo>}}

Author: Can't, as it wakes up text we wish to keep sleeping.
